Hello and welcome in this lecture, we're going to be adding in controller movements so that we can
move around using a controller.
Which is what you're seeing going on right here, going to do this using a different set of axes for
look up.
Right and look.
Right, right.
And we'll see why that is necessary.
Let's dive in and find out why.
So I want to be able to move around our scene using the control, I can already do this when I am not
in play mode.
So we won't be able to do the same sort of movement as this with panning with the right stick and with
moving around left and right with our left stick.
And we can also go up and down with.
But that's not something the app horn is gonna be able to do because it's not a flying pawn.
So what we are going to want to do is, first of all, it's easy to map the movement.
Well, we have to do is go to our project settings, go down to wherever input is, engine inputs,
and we've got and move forward access.
And we've also got our move right axis.
And that's pretty straightforward to add in yet another mapping as well as W and S we can add in our
gamepad.
If we look on the game pad, you can see the left thumb stick.
We want the Y axis for moving forward, for the moving right.
We're going to add the again, the game pants and it's the game pad, still the left stick.
But this time we're doing X and Y axis and we can see whether that is the right sort of movement.
So go ahead and hit play.
I use ULP as my shortcut for that, then left and right.
Works forward and backwards.
Works as we would expect.
But obviously turning doesn't work because we haven't mapped that yet.
So let's give that a shot.
If we go to settings, project settings and inputs again, let's have a look.
Look up.
We are currently using the mouse y.
What would be wrong with just adding in here?
For example, the game pad.
The right stick.
And this time the Y axis.
Well, on first attempt we can go and have a little plank.
This might actually seem to be okay.
So we go in and you can see we can move around.
Yeah, sure.
It's a little bit fast, but it's kind of okay, isn't it.
Isn't that okay?
Well, not really.
And the reason ultimately boils down to frame rates and how these axes work.
So what happens with a mouse when we're running a game at 30 frames per second?
When we move our mouse from left to right across the screen, a kind of even speed, we might see that
the axes values are something like 10, then 10, then 10.
And this is telling us that each time the mouse is moved by 10 units to the right and it's done at the
same every frame.
What happens if we double our frame rate?
Well, suddenly the mouse is still moving at the same rate because the player is still moving their
hand at the same speed.
But because we're showing frames more often, we're having tics more often.
Then what's gonna happen is the input from the axes is actually going to be halved each time we're going
to get a five or five five five five.
So great, that's fine, because that means that we're still going to be panning across our screen at
the same rate.
No matter whether we have a fast computer or a slow computer, if we move our mouse by a certain amount,
you're going to notice the same amount of movement, which is what we want.
Now, things change a little bit when we look at the controller, say we go full throttle to the right
with our analog controller and it's at 30 frames a second.
We get one, then one.
Then one makes sense, right?
What about if it's at 60 frames per second, we still get one, then one, then one, then one.
But we get more of them because we're getting more frames.
If you use that directly to effect the movement of your pawn, you're gonna see that it moves at twice
the speed, at twice the frame rate.
Not what we want.
So we want to do is introduce some frame rate independents here.
So to do this, we need to be able to multiply by the DLC to time.
We kind of want to use the input axis to help us modulate the rotation speed.
So that's a little bit to take in there.
But what I mean is that we need to have something like a rotation rate variable to create a new property
for that, which is going to be an edit anywhere.
And we are going to have it be a float and it's going to be the rotation rate.
Now, I'm going to use the same rotation rate for both up and left and right.
You can go ahead and have a separate variable for both of those.
And I don't really know what a good rotation rate is going to be here.
Just going to give a flying gas hakes.
I'm not sure what the units involved are here at all.
So I'm just gonna go ahead and say 10.
But we'll see.
Maybe that's way too fast.
Maybe that's way too slow.
We can adjust that in our blueprint so we can go ahead and save that.
I'm gonna go over to the C++ old O to switch the C++, by the way, and we're going to want to have
a new type of access so that we can distinguish between the move.
Right.
Which is the mouse and direct movement versus the move.
Or rather sorry.
The look.
Right.
Which is the rate.
So I'm gonna do that by going over to our project settings and instead of having this gamepad left thumb
stick mapped to the move.
Right.
So right.
Not the left something to the right one.
Maps to look up.
I keep making that mistake.
Remove that from the axis and add a new axis, which is going to be the look.
Up.
Right.
And this is going to take in game pad.
So game pad.
Right.
Why access?
Because it's a look up.
And we're saying that positive one should be the one that we're using.
So then what we can do is we need to map this and we don't want to map it directly to the ad controller.
Your because we need to do a little bit of maths to calculate the rates and make those rates frame rate
independent.
So what we're going to do is go over to old oh and create ourselves a look up which handly we've already
got here.
And I'm going to create it as look up.
Right.
And go ahead and create this control shift p and I'm using my correct implementation plugin.
Go ahead and do a look up rate implementation.
Got an axis value coming in.
That's great.
We then wants to make sure that's what we're calling in setup player input components.
So let's create a new line here.
Duplicate the look.
Right.
I'm gonna call it look up.
Like so.
And then copy and paste the.
Fully qualified reference to the function to call, I look up right then.
Essentially, what we want to be calling at the end of the day is add controller input, pitch controller
pitch input.
But we want to multiply this by a couple of things.
So access value comes in as a value between zero and one.
If we multiply that, so access value multiplied by the rate rotation rate.
Then what we're going to get is a speed.
But what we want is actually a distance, like when we moved our mouse, we moved at a certain distance,
every frame.
That's what was coming in.
We want to convert this speed to distance.
And if you remember some way back in some hazy math class to get from speed distance, we need to multiply
by the amounts of time.
So we do that by getting our delta seconds from the world.
Now, what is Delta seconds?
That is the amount of time that it took for the last frame.
So it's kind of the opposite of the frame rate.
It's telling us how long a frame takes, which is great because that is the amount of time that we need
to apply this movement over.
So if you think about it, we've got speed.
We've got an amount of time that we need to apply that speed over.
It gives us an amount of movement that we essentially want to apply to our controller pitch input.
So that's what we want.
Get world, first of all, because we want to get the level, we'll get the world around us.
And then from that, we use the arrow function to do get Delta seconds, which tells us that we want
to get the amount of time that elapsed in the last frame, which gives us, again, this approximation
of our frame rate at the current moment in time.
Now, you might be wondering why we're not doing the same with the movement inputs.
And the reason is that the movement input, when you do an add input there, it's already supposing
that that's a rate, not an actual amount of movement.
So it's already doing this calculation for us, essentially under the hood, save up the files, go
over into unreal and compile and see whether any of this is worth it.
So let's head on into play and I'm going to try and use my controller input.
There we go.
We're going up and down rather slowly, but hopefully this will be completely frame rate independent
because we've used that Delta time.
So what I want you to do is to go ahead and implement the look.
Right.
So repeat the same methods set up for looking right as he did for looking up and tweak the speed so
that it doesn't go really slow and you can actually use it to move around the level, pause the video
and have a go.
Okay, welcome back.
So first step was we went and created a new axis mapping in a project settings, we're gonna have to
do that again this time for the look, right?
Right.
So, Matthew, then we're going to go and get the game pad.
The right this time and the x axis, that's when we're going to be mapping to.
And then we're going to go over to shoot her head off all this time, I'm going to duplicate the look
up.
Right.
Let me just show you the files that so you can see where I am.
Over on the left hand side.
So, again, it's a have instead of a look up.
Right.
It's going to be the look.
Control shift p.
Great implementation.
And we're going to have pretty much exactly the same code with the same multiplication that is getting
us from, again, a speed to a amount of distance moved.
That's the look.
Right.
So instead of doing the ADD controller pitch, we need to do the your input this time.
And they look right.
Rate is going to need to be called from our set player input component or need to be called when the
axis is actually being manipulated.
So we're going to add another axis in hands that will look up.
Right.
It's gonna be the look.
And then.
So we're going to want to copy that reference to the function and bring the ampersand before.
And then the fully qualified issued character, Colon.
Colon, look.
Right.
Let's go ahead and save both that and the head of file.
Go back into the project and exit play, which are left going.
Hit.
Compile here.
And then.
We should be able to dive in and have a play around, so up and down is working slowly left and right.
Not quite working out how I would expect.
Let's check our project settings so I look right.
Right.
Seems okay.
Thumb stick, right.
Thumb stick.
Hack access.
Let's check that.
That's all going through into the C++ correctly by an axis look.
Right.
Is calling the look.
Function all seems in order.
Calling the your input as it should be.
Dana, what happened there?
I just hit Recompile again and then hit play again, sometimes we have to do this, but now the looking
left and right is working up and down, is working, albeit it's a very, very slow pace.
So we're going to tweak around with our character blueprint.
Let's go and find out.
BP, shoot a character, open up his blueprints.
And then let's scroll on down and find the rotation rate on gains just multiplied by 10.
Try and go 10 times faster than will find a value.
That makes sense somewhere in between.
This is always one way that you can try and find values is just by going and changing the order of magnitude
first.
Well, that's much more closely in the right ballpark.
It's maybe a little too sensitive.
So maybe I just slam that down by a half, try about 50 this time not 500, but 50.
Try that out.
Hit play and move my stick around.
Okay.
That's feeling much more natural.
You might want to go somewhere just a little bit in between those two.
So go in between the two again.
I'd say about 70 this time, rather than going all the way to one hundred seventy.
Might be the right ray.
Let's see if we've hit gold.
Yes, I think so.
I think 70 is going to be the right rate for me to move around, obviously.
This is the kind of thing that's often games allow you to tweak our allow the player to tweak in the
settings.
We're not going to look into that.
That's beyond the scope of this section.
But it is something that you might potentially want to expose to users in your own games.
Also in that lecture, we have seen the difference between controller input and mouse input and how
we have to deal with rates instead of absolute movements.
So in the next lecture, we're gonna look at that third person camera that I kept hinting at.
See that?